# Logic in Kind

In the previous chapters, we saw many examples of factual statements (propositions) and ways to present evidence of their truth (proofs). In particular, we extensively worked with equality propositions in the form *e1 = e2*, implications *(p -> q)*, and quantified propositions *(x -> P(x))*. In this chapter, we will see how Kind can be used to perform other familiar forms of logical reasoning.

Before diving into the details, let's talk a little about the status of mathematical statements in Kind. Remember that Kind is a typed language, which means that every meaningful expression in its world has an associated type. Logical statements are no exception: any statement we try to prove in Kind has a type, namely Type, the type of propositions. We can see this with the type *Boolean*:

```rust,ignore
Bool: Type
Bool.true  : Bool
Bool.false : Bool
```

In the *Bool* type we have ``Bool.true`` and ``Bool.false``. To create the Bool type, we declare that it is a type (Type) and then that ``Bool.true`` and ``Bool.false`` are of type Bool. Seeing how it is done, it becomes much simpler. We are often intimidated by the "*functional*" name, but Kind is a very friendly language, we will see more about this later on.

Another possible example is *Nat*, the natural numbers. Natural numbers are all non-negative integers. That is, they start with the number zero and go to infinity, but do not have decimal values. Therefore, ``3`` is a natural number, but ``3.14`` is not, just as ``-3`` is not. So we know that the natural number is made up of *zero* and its *successors*. Let's see how this is in Kind:

```rust,ignore
Nat: Type
Nat.zero             : Nat
Nat.succ (pred: Nat) : Nat
```

We notice that the construction is similar to Booleans, but there is an extra element in ``Nat.succ``, which is "*(pred: Nat)*", and this is because, while in the other we had only two return options (*True* or *False*), now we have an infinity of numbers that the code needs to understand, and there must be a way for the code to stop running (we will see more about this throughout this study), since code that never stops running is code that will never give us the result.

However, in any case, we notice that the structure of *Nat* is basically the same as *Bool*, which shows us that we can create any type, as long as we follow the same structure. Let's create the juice type:

```rust,ignore
Juice : Type
Juice.laranja : Juice
Juice.caju    : Juice
```

Orange juice has two constructors, *Juice.laranja* and *Juice.caju*. This type is fictitious, it did not exist until now, but now we can use it as a type and this shows us that, thanks to Kind's design, we can create an infinity of types, since every type is a function.

Understanding the construction of *types* will prevent some syntax errors from occurring.

to review, our element *Juice* is of type Type and *Juice.orange* is of type *Juice*. Thus, in layman's terms, the element is to the right of the colon and the type is to the left:

```rust,ignore
element : Type
```

As previously mentioned, even types are functions, so we can have a function as a type. For example:

```rust,ignore
Problem : Equal Bool Bool.true Bool.true
```

We can see that we have an element called "*Problem*" and it is of type "*(Equal Bool Bool.true Bool.true)*". We have seen this structure several times in the past chapters, and it is now easy to understand that this function is a type and, just as **we don't write** it, we **cannot** simply copy the function to the constructors of this type.

```rust,ignore
Suco: Type
Suco.laranja : Type
```

*Juice* is of type *Type*, but *Juice.orange* is not of type *Type*, it is of type *Juice*.

But be aware that all syntactically well-formed propositions have type Type in Kind, regardless of whether they are true or not. Simply being a proposition is one thing; being demonstrable is another thing!

In fact, propositions do not just have types: they are first-class objects that can be manipulated in the same way as other entities in the world of Kind. So far, we have seen a primary location where propositions can appear: in the type signatures of functions.

```rust,ignore
Plus_2_2_is_4 : Equal (Plus 2n 2n) 4n
Plus_2_2_is_4 = Equal.refl
```

But propositions can be used in many other ways. For example, we can give a name to a proposition as a value in its own right, just as we gave names to expressions of other types.

```rust,ignore
Plus_fact : Type
Plus_fact = Equal (Plus 2n 2n) 4n
```

Later, we can use this name in any situation where a proposition is expected - for example, in a function declaration.

```rust,ignore
Plus_fact_is_true : Plus_fact
Plus_fact_is_true = Equal.refl
```

We can also write parameterized propositions - that is, functions that take arguments of some type and return a proposition. For example, the following function takes a number and returns a proposition asserting that this number is equal to three:

```rust,ignore
Is_three (n: Nat) : Type
Is_three n = Equal Nat n 3n
```

In Kind, functions that return propositions are said to define properties of their arguments.
For example, here is a (polymorphic) property that defines the familiar notion of an injective function:

```rust,ignore
Injective <a> <b> (f: a -> b) : Type
Injective a b f = (x: a) -> (y: a) -> (e: Equal b (f x) (f y)) -> (Equal a x y)
```

We can instantiate a rule of injectivity with

```rust,ignore
Nat.succ_injective : Injective ((x: Nat) => Nat.succ x)
Nat.succ_injective =
  (a: Nat) =>
  (b: Nat) =>
  (e: Equal Nat (Nat.succ a) (Nat.succ b)) =>
  Equal.apply (x => Nat.pred x) e
```

<!-- e criar tipos que precisam de injetividade com

```rust,ignore
type Injective <a: Type> <b: Type> (f: a -> b) {
  new (p: Nat.succ_injective f)
}

InjectiveNat : Injective (n => Nat.succ n)
InjectiveNat = Injective.new Nat.succ_injective
``` -->
